the European Union foreign policy Chief
has accused Israel of funding Hamas
Joseph Burell alleged that Israel
supported the militant group to weaken
the more moderate Palestinian Authority
in the past Israel's prime minister has
denied similar allegations Hamas is
designated a terrorist organization by
multiple countries Burell did not offer
any kind of proof or expand more on his
statements which he made at a university
in
Spain
we believe that a two-state solution
imposed from the outside can bring
peace and I have to insist that although
Israel denies it they themselves have
created Hamas and yes Hamas has been
financed by the Israeli government to
try to weaken the Palestinian
Authority but if we don't intervene
forcefully the spiral of hatred and
violence will continue from generation
to generation
and from funeral to
funeral and the seeds of hatred that are
being sown in Gaza today will
flourish let's talk more about this with
Jack parck our Brussels correspondent he
joins us now from there uh Jack what can
you tell us about the comments made by
uh borell at this Spanish University and
do you believe he speaking in his role
as EU foreign policy Chief
there yeah that's really the big
question Gart I mean you can see from
his outfit that he's not really dressed
in the way we'd ordinarily see him
delivering press conferences in a in a
suit and tie he was there at the
University of Alid doid doid dressed up
in this sort of uh you know ceremonial
gar to speak to the students and
delivered this blistering speech against
the Israeli government and specifically
against prime minister Benjamin
Netanyahu where he accused the prime
minister of funding H Hamas indeed of
basically trying to derail the two-state
solution that the EU favors for the last
30 years now we sort of know that these
are Joseph Bell's own personal positions
on this issue he's a Spanish socialist
who are generally perceived uh that
political group in Spain to be more Pro
Palestine uh than other political
entities in the European Union but when
you become the EU foreign policy Chief
you take on the role that is the
speaking for the European Union and you
do that pretty much in whatever context
you're speaking in so a lot of these
comments that he's made will not be
going down very well in Israel and we
also know uh that here in Brussels uh
we've had word from some of his advisers
that actually perhaps some of these uh
things that he said were not necessarily
lines that were approved in the
institutions of the European Union
Joseph barell is 79 years old he's a
veteran politician and he's probably
only got about five months left here in
the in the his job in the European Union
so he's potentially speaking for himself
in this instance but when he speaks for
himself because of the position he holds
uh has a lot of weight and a lot of
attention is put on that as the eu's
foreign policy Chief our correspondent
Jack perck in Brussels there thank you
very
much let's go on and speak to Hans yakob
Schindler he is the senior director of
the counter extremism project and joins
us from New York now what do you think
of the European Union's foreign policy
Chief's allegation that Hamas was
created and funded by
Israel well I mean first of all I do not
think that this is the official position
of the EU and I'm think he's going to
have a bit of explanation to do because
he conflates a couple of things clearly
there's been some measure of divide and
Rule going on by the Israeli government
since Hamas was created because it was
seen as an alternative in 1988 to the
PLO which at that time still denied the
existence of Israel as well so it was
essentially seen as a competition of two
guys who both wanted to destroy Israel
now subsequently in the early 90s the
PLO became the PNA after the oso Accords
and actually recognized the existence of
Israel now what he left out in all of
this uh narrative is of course that
since Hamas was in exclusive control in
Gaza in two after 200 they won the
election in 2006 throughout fatak by
force and weapons um in in in 2007
Israel has attacked Gaza and Hamas
pretty much every single year the last
attack on Gaza and Hamas positions
before October 7 was in May 2023 so this
kind of belies these narratives that
Hamas was a convenient Ally for the
Israeli government or even for Mr Nano
um in order to weaken the PNA there was
an element of that but Israel very
sustainably has has fought the
terroristic aspects of Hamas from the
GetGo now if that happened in one way or
another how did money destined for the
Palestinian militant group Hamas
actually get into
Gaza well there is the inofficial and
then there is the official money so the
inofficial money that Hamas collected
and got from State supporters uh Iran
especially but also to a certain extent
uh donations from Qatar um that went in
various ways with cash being transported
cash floated from ships but also money
exchange houses several of which had
been designated by the US authorities as
well as the Israeli authorities over the
years and then there was the official
money so any humanitarian Aid money
there is no banking relationship between
Gaza and NS in the world any official
Aid money whether it's from the European
Union from Israel or from uh the United
States had to go first and foremost to
the Israeli banking system was then
cashed out by Israeli officials and
transported into Gaza so in that aspect
Mr Bell is right Israel did hand over
money to Gaza to to Hamas in Gaza but it
did so on behalf of humanitarian
organizations and governments that
wanted to help Gaza and according to the
OS Law Court Israel is collecting taxes
for the Palestinian national authorities
and that means tax money that went to
Gaza and tax money that went to um the
pales National Authority in in the West
Bank so again Israel paid the money but
it was part of the agreement that it did
so now why do you think Burell said this
and why
now I think there's an increasing
frustration with Mr Bell in particular
um and your correspondent outlined his
political background um with the
inability of finding a solution for the
day after in Gaza um what we are seeing
right now um is that Israel with its
military operations is buying itself
time the destruction of the physical
infrastructure the elimination arrest of
Fighters uh the destruction of the arms
and Rockets and ammunition Dums is all
things that can be retrained replaced if
there is no sustainable solution in Gaza
and so far there has not really been a
serious plan on what happens once the
Hamas infrastructure in Gaza is uh
eliminated and what happens in the long
run with the Palestinians because a
sustainable solution for Gaza is
unlikely to be enough to prevent another
extremist movement whether it's called
itself Hamas or any other name from
emerging again and Israel in particular
the Israeli government has been very
very hesitant also for internal
government reasons because there are
extremely rightwing parties in this
government that Mr netan has to blate if
he doesn't want his government to
collapse to address that issue of what
happens afterwards with Gaza and what
happens with the Palestinians
nevertheless I don't think an two-state
solution forced upon both parties from
the outside is necessarily the most
sustainable solution here anob Shin from
the counter extremism project thank you
very much for sharing your expertise
with
us